# Efficient Deep CNN-BiLSTM Model for Network Intrusion Detection
# Abstract

Since the widespread adoption of cloud technologies, there has been an increase in the demand for Network Intrusion Detection Systems. With ever-increasing network traffic, Network Intrusion Detection (NIDS) is a critical component of network security, and a highly efficient NIDS is required, given the frequency with which new types of attacks emerge. These intrusion detection systems are based on either a pattern matching system, or an anomaly detection system based on AI/ML. Pattern matching methods typically have high False Positive Rates, whereas AI/ML-based methods rely on finding a metric/feature or a correlation between a set of metrics/features to predict the possibility of an attack. The most common of these are KNN, SVM, and others, which operate on a limited set of features, have lower accuracy, and suffer from higher False Positive Rates. This paper proposed a deep learning model that incorporates learning of spatial and temporal data features by combining the distinct strengths of a Convolutional Neural Network and a Bi-directional LSTM. The publicly available dataset NSL-KDD is used to train and test the model in this paper. The proposed model has a high detection rate and a low False Positive Rate. The proposed model outperforms many cutting-edge Network Intrusion Detection systems that use Machine Learning/Deep Learning models.

# Data Analysis

The proposed model in this paper is tested using the NSL-KDD dataset. The University of New Brunswick made the NSL-KDD dataset available. Normalization of numeric features and One Hot Encoding of Categorical features in the dataset are commonly used for preprocessing datasets. There are categorical features in the NSL-KDD dataset that should be converted to numerical values for our deep learning model to produce accurate predictions. As a result, in the pre-processing section, these columns were converted into numerical values using the pandas python library's get-dummies function. One-hot encoding is preferred over label encoding because label encoding produces multiple numbers in the same column, which the model may misinterpret as being in a specific order, affecting classification. Normalization is the process of rescaling data into a specific range in order to reduce redundancy and improve model training time. The paper employs Min-Max Normalization, which rescales the data range to [0,1].

Stratification is the process of rearranging data so that each fold is an accurate representation of the whole. The stratified K-cross fold validation technique divides the dataset into K sets, and the model trains on K-1 folds before being validated on the Kth fold. This is repeated until all of the folds have been used to validate the model. Stratification ensures that each fold is a good representation of the entire dataset, which leads to parameter finetuning and improves the model's ability to classify attacks. The K-cross fold method is preferred over other validation methods because it performs better and requires less computation power.

# Recommendations

There are several ways to improve upon the findings of this project. One way to elaborate on the project's goal would be to include additional data points. And also, Random Oversampling can be used to overcome the problem of imbalanced data. Random oversampling duplicates data points from the minority class at random, reducing data imbalance and improving minority class prediction accuracy. Another recommendation would be to be research on several pre-trained Deep Learning models to find the most accurate model possible. This would make a good candidate for extended deep learning analysis.

# Conclusion

This paper proposes a model for analyzing network traffic that takes into account a wide range of variables such as protocol type, service type, and so on. The use of CNN and Bi-directional LSTM layers allowed for the learning of spatial and temporal features. After training and testing on the NSL-KDD dataset, the proposed model yields promising prospective real-time usage for Intrusion Detection systems. Although the model would almost certainly need to be professionally monitored in a production environment, the risk of overfitting, misclassification, or error rate creep is significantly lower than that of many other machine learning models currently available. Furthermore, it necessitates fewer computing resources, less training time, and less specialized care during implementation and maintenance. Finally, the predictive responses are simple to understand and can be applied to a wide range of categories. As a result of the findings, the need to optimize the model for the U2R and Worms categories of attacks will be investigated in the future to allow testing in a honeypot system.